[Music]
if you've reached the top of a ferris
wheel that dizzying fear of accidentally
falling off might pop into your head but
on a cruise ship hey these things can be
taller than the Eiffel Tower so it's not
that surprising if you're standing there
admiring the views and finding yourself
wondering gee what happens if you fall
overboard well in August 2018 a UK woman
was sailing on the Adriatic Sea it seems
like nothing out of the ordinary just
the perfect summer vacation out on the
open water the norwegian star cruise
liner was heading to venice italy after
departing from varga roll of croatia the
woman was on the seventh death when
right before midnight
she fell off the back of the ship it
happened about 60 miles off the coast of
a city called Pula too far away to call
for help as soon as the crew found out
about the incident they launched a major
search and rescue they checked onboard
CCTV cameras to find out exactly when
the fall happened that way they could
pinpoint the ship's precise location at
that time the liner also contacted the
authorities and they dispatched a patrol
ship a plane and two rescue boats to
look for the woman the search went on
all night the Sun came up and she was
still nowhere to be found but then at
about 9:30 a.m. they saw a figure off in
the distance could it be her as they
approached she must have spotted them
too because she started waving her hands
when the rescue boat finally got to her
it was clear that the woman was
exhausted call and in slight shock but
she looked pretty good for someone who
had spent the last 10 hours just
floating in the sea and waiting for help
they found her about one mile from where
she'd fallen
[Music]
the rescue team took her straight to the
hospital after doing all the necessary
checks she was released with quite the
story to tell okay
so is that the typical situation when
someone goes overboard
sadly no the odds of surviving such a
big fall and then spending the night in
the middle of the ocean are slim to say
the least but this woman had several
factors in her favor she worked as a
flight attendant so she likely knew what
to do during an emergency more than the
average person in one of her interviews
she explained that she tried to stay
calm and sang throughout the night to
keep herself warm she was also a pretty
fit person so she was able to keep
herself a flow now on the bright side
falling overboard isn't something you
need to worry about if you've booked a
cruise or would like to do so in the
future most ships don't come across such
problems and if they do it's incredibly
rare the cruise lines International
Association says that this kind of thing
happens only about once for every 1.3
million passengers if it makes you feel
any better you have more chances of
catching the cold or flu on the ship
but in those few instances when a person
does go overboard what does that
play-by-play look like well a lot
depends on eye witnesses if they can
report it to the crew immediately then
that's the ideal situation but no matter
when they find out an emergency protocol
always follows first the bridge that's
the captain's room gets notified they'll
usually stop the ship immediately and
probably even turn around the bridge
will also report it to the authorities
and alert the Coast Guard so that they
can send rescue boats and helicopters or
small planes while all that is happening
the emergency crew members are getting
together to find out where the person
fell they throw life preservers
overboard to make sure the individual
has a flotation device while they wait
for rescue those preservers could be a
life jacket and one of those orange
buoys you see attached to the decks
railings keeping yourself afloat in deep
water is difficult and exhausting so
these devices can make all the
difference
again if the crew knows nothing about
the incident from the get-go and the
ship hasn't covered much distance in
that time then they'll release the
lifeboats at once if not then
search-and-rescue operations continue
until the person overboard is located
time is of the essence though the vast
unwelcoming waters of the deep sea
aren't easy to cope with if nobody sees
the person fall in and they only notice
that missing later on then the chances
of successful rescue are not good only
about ten to fifteen percent why so low
well for one the ocean is really big
finding one human floating among all
that endless blue is no easy task
and it's not like the sea is and
span far from it actually there could be
floating debris and trash that might
mislead rescuers there's also that
difficult task of staying afloat so that
rescuers can see you in the first place
imagine having to continually move your
arms and legs to keep all your
bodyweight near the surface so that your
heads above it there's no floor beneath
your feet you have to hold yourself up
now imagine doing that with an injury if
you fall from a considerable height you
risk fracturing bones when hitting the
water how so because water feels like
concrete when you fall from high up
remember the whole thing about some
cruise ships being taller than the
Eiffel Tower yeah that's a mighty big
hide all right you can also get the
breath knocked out of you or worse the
temperature of the water can be a
deciding factor as well
when someone falls into cold waters they
automatically go into a cold shock
response out of instinct they try to
inhale air while they're underwater and
let's not forget the risk of hypothermia
when the waters around 40 degrees
Fahrenheit a person only has 60 minutes
before their body just gets too cold if
it's 50 degrees that time doubles at 60
it triples and so on so basically if
you're gonna fall do it in tropical
waters or you know
don't fall at all if you're going for
that final tip then the odds are in your
favor modern cruise ships are the safest
they've ever been and they have plenty
of ways to keep this from happening in
the first place those preventive
measures include increasing railing
around the decks and making those
barriers taller so that people can't
tumble over them and recently some state
of the art detection systems like motion
sensors radars and tracking devices came
out to add even more protection long
story short
yeah too late for that the measures they
take to prevent people from taking a
spill overboard make ships one of the
safest ways to travel so no need to go
and cancel your long-awaited Caribbean
cruise but I already know what you're
thinking because I'm a plan B kind of
guy myself just in case the worst comes
to worst and you accidentally take a
tumble while peeking over the railing in
awe of how big this ship is here's what
you need to do to survive stay afloat oh
really bright side I was planning on
sprouting gills okay fine got me there
staying afloat is a lot easier if you
have something to hold on to but I
imagine you didn't have time to grab
that buoy as you fell over the side so
fill your airs with lungs up scratch
that fill your lungs with air and lie on
your back with your arms and legs spread
out move them slowly to stay afloat this
position also helps rescuers spot you
more easily there's another technique
they learn in the US Navy
it's called drown proofing and it's for
rough waters you stretch your body out
but facing down and lift your head for
air keep your shirt on
no really being in the middle of an
ocean you're prone to sunburn and
heatstroke so keep your clothes on
they'll protect you don't drink seawater
you'll get thirsty for sure but the high
concentration of salt in ocean water is
toxic to humans generally we can consume
tiny amounts of seawater but the body
can't process higher quantities in other
words it's the last resort just like
that rundown hotel at the end of the
island the last resort and never mind
stay put the first instinct you'll
probably have is to swim towards the
ship the problem is it's more difficult
to identify distances at sea which means
you'll likely miss calculate how far
away the ship is and just wear yourself
out swimming in vain plus the rescue
team will start looking for you in the
spot where you fell don't leave that
place stay calm
easier said than done but you must
conserve your energy
panic does the opposite it wears you out
faster and cloud your thinking just keep
calm stay positive and wait for help to
arrive
they're coming don't you worry and hey
once they rescue you
you can check into the last resort hey
if you learn something new today then
give the video a like and share it with
a friend and here are some other cool
videos I know you'll enjoy just click to
the left or right and remember stay on
the bright side of life